Introduction
============

For food safety screen and risk prevention, attaining a high confidence answer is of the utmost importance. In the past, bacterial pathogen screening was done using a combination of laboratory methods and statistical analyses with extensive benchmarking histories and known sensitivity, specificity and accuracy accross many matrices and sampling situations. Recently, the USDA Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) and the food industry have begun to employ Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) on isolates from food production environments and food products. The accuracy of bacterial pathogen screening from WGS data relies not only on the methods used to isolate, extract and sequence the bacterial DNA, but also largely on the bioinformatics and statistical analyses applied to the resulting sequence data.

While WGS methods have higher resolution than Pulse Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE), the results of WGS analysis are dependent on the analytic approach and the software chosen by the analyst. There is no standard method that can be compared across samples, and different results are often obtained via the use of different bioinformatics tools and different parameters within those tools. For this reason, we have put together a WGS pipeline that attempts to use a combination of the best and most proven bioinformatics tools, based on published literature results and our team's internal testing. In addition to using multiple tools for a given method, we also utilize more than one method in our approach to characterizing the bacterial genomic sequence of a given sample. Below, you can find an illustration of our pipeline.
